# TCGA Real Data Analysis

This pipelines are codes to run real data analysis using TCGA data. The files include:

- The procedure for preparing gene expression data are included in 1\_eData\_\{CancerType\}.Rmd files.  The processed gene expression data are then uploaded into CIBERSORTx website to obtain estimates of cell type proportions for each bulk tumor sample using CIBERSORTx's default cell type specific reference: LM22

- 2_run_COAD.R and 2_run_another_cancer_type.R:  estimates of cell type proportions for each cancer type. The code for COAD is a bit different from other cancer types because it has its own input and output file formats. The other file 2_run_another_cancer_type.R can be used to run multiple cancer types using the shell script  2_run_another_cancer_type.sh. These files include the following steps.

  - read in pure cell type data: data are stored in ../cell_type_specific_reference/data, include

    - methylation_pure_ct_info.txt.gz
    - methylation_pure_ct_rmPC2_data_signif4.txt.gz
    - methylation_pure_ct_sample.txt

  - read in DNA methylation data: the source files are

    - methylation_betaValue.txt for COAD or \{CancerType\}_methylation.txt.gz for other cancer type. 

  - take intersection of CpG probes between purified data and bulk tumor samples.

  - read in probes to be used: ref_966probes.RData, located in

    ../cell_type_specific_reference/data, this is also used in the Simulation Study.

  - Compute and compare estimation results from DNA methylation data

- 3_SKCM_ct_prop_comparison.Rmd: compares gene expression-based cell type proportion estimated using two references. One is the LM22 from CIBERSORTs, and the other one was generated by us using the single cell RNA-seq data. See https://github.com/Sun-lab/IT-predictor for more details. 
 

